[Music]
lincoln david doesn't mention
much about free will in the beginning of
infinity
um but but it is mentioned and it's and
it's mentioned in the context of
creativity and i'm really attracted to
this idea
that human choice is indeed a product of
creativity and it certainly informed my
own thinking on this whole idea
i don't know how to divorce
free will from choices that if choice
exists in the world
and in then then if choice exists in the
world
and we are the agents
that do the choosing then we have
free will our will the thing that we
want is free
to choose among these things now it
wouldn't be it wouldn't be if of course
as many people observe
if someone coerced you in some way then
your will is less
free you want to do x but you're not
allowed to do x
for fear of violence or something else
fear of death perhaps
so you can't do x so your will has been
constrained to do something else you
don't really have
the free will that you did so i think
free will is this
spectrum this these degrees of freedom
that you have
and importantly with human beings unlike
with say
dogs or cats okay you have the classy
experiment
figure out what what what food the dog
likes and so you put out two different
kinds of food
and you let the dog go to the one that
it prefers
did the dog really make a choice well in
one sense it kind of did because there
were two
things there in existence but it did
really contemplate
or did it just rely upon what its genes
were telling it to do
are we any different in this case we are
because
unlike with the dog we can choose
to create something completely new that
isn't there before
us and that choice itself that choice to
actually do
go through the effort of creating is
itself
a free choice that we don't have to make
one can consider when you know in a
similar situation
in the evening you want to have dinner
you've got a certain number of things in
the fridge
there's a certain number of ways in
which you could combine them into
interesting meals
you can choose among them that's a free
choice but you could also choose to
do something completely different and go
to the supermarket and buy some more
ingredients
or to call up a restaurant and get
something delivered
so on and so forth etc etc we really can
create new choices bring new choices
into the world this is our
creativity in action and the act of
choosing
among these things is what i would
regard as free will
so i i just regard creativity
choices and free will and this capacity
to explain the world
as all intimately linked none of them
have good explanations and so it's for
this reason i kind of agree with david
where he says elsewhere in the book
that they might all come along for the
ride
in the one jump to universality that as
soon as you have this jump
to explanatory universality people being
universal explainers
then all of those things come along
including consciousness as well perhaps
we don't know but the point is that
it seems like a parsimonious idea that
these are all facets
of the one deep profound mystery of what
human personhood is about we're
conscious
we're creative we make choices in the
world we do those
freely and so
perhaps whatever the ultimate
explanation is of these things or what
whatever the
explanation of the future is that
enables us to
create artificial general intelligence
that we will recognize
that these words that we use creativity
consciousness free will whatever
that all of these things will come
together in some way we'll have a better
understanding of each of them
and the ways in which they are real but
i say that they're real
one reason i say that they're real is
because they are
unavoidably part of the explanation of
what it is that people are doing is an
explanation of their behavior
an explanation of how it is they create
science and civilization
and everything else that trying to
remove
any of them causes more problems than it
solves
you're left wondering if you think
something like
creativity isn't some kind of deep
mystery
um that in fact all we need is ever more
faster hardware and eventually we'll
achieve escape velocity we'll have
artificial intelligence that is
creative and more creative than us and
it's just a matter of processing power
which is seems to be the
most popular idea right now okay the the
this nick bostrom singularity idea
that all we need is faster processing
and once we've got sufficient amount of
processing
sufficient amount of memory so on and so
forth then we will have an agent that is
able to think faster than us
about anything at all better than us and
therefore the problem of creativity is
solved at the hardware
at the hardware level many of us think
that is completely wrong that assumes
a solution to what creativity is it
sidelines creativity
and says creativity is no deep mystery
that that we
are just um processes with some memory
and there's nothing particularly special
about the software of course what
the beginning of infinity teaches us
what david deutsch's main
point is in a lot of this is that the
hardware has very little to do with this
mystery at all it's all about the
software
this is the great mystery we have this
algorithm running on our
brains that is able to
uh improve itself over time and improve
its understanding of the world over time
as well
and it can augment itself with
technology
but it's got nothing to do with how fast
we can think
the computer can think faster than us
but it's not more creative than us
right now but but of all of these
qualities i would say of the human mind
which
may be synonymous one with another
creativity
choices consciousness the ability to be
universal explainer
free will that last one the
three-wheeled one is the most
contentious one it seems to me
maybe consciousness is up there as well
and as i've observed elsewhere
there are certain philosophers who will
deny free will
but regard some of the other aspects of
this
as deeply mysterious sam harris who i
respect
very much and love to listen to on this
particular topic
has written a book a vehement defense of
the idea
we do not have free will simultaneously
he also argues that the deepest mystery
in the universe
aside from the existence of the universe
itself is the fact that we are conscious
so as he dismisses the free will issue
uprisings consciousness as being a
profound and deep mystery and he says
that his subjective experience of
consciousness
reveals to him that free will doesn't
exist that you do not have a subjective
experience of consciousness
and here all i can say to that
is we would just have to disagree
because i do have a subjective
experience of consciousness
now if you meditate and clear your mind
of everything
it should be no surprise to you that it
seems as if
you have no free will because it then
seems as if the thoughts are arising
unbidden
by you but if you are really
trying not to concentrate and actively
trying to dampen down your
thinking then of course it will feel as
though
it will be a sensation and this is this
is a theme running through
sam's philosophy this idea of feelings
that you have the sensation or the
experience of
not having free will or the absence of
free will i'm unsurprised that you feel
as though you've got an absence of free
will
when you're not thinking when you're
trying to think hard about
what to choose to do next but if you try
to be
conscious of the choices before you
i think that in those moments and you
can be mindful
in your conscious experience of the
present moment i think you will find
that
you can experience the very real
sensation of
actually having choices in the world and
that you will freely be able to choose
one thing over another but this takes us
far and wide away from where i want to
go with this chapter
just to say that almost in any of these
debates where people end up at
loggerheads about
the existence of free will or not i i
think we can happily grant to people
okay
i'll agree with you that your form of
free will doesn't exist okay for the
purpose of moving forward and making
progress on this particular
question what's the particular question
the deep profound mystery
that almost everyone interested in this
topic will agree is there
somewhere so sam might think well it's
not there in free will okay fine
it's there in consciousness then i agree
i think we need to solve that
that that's a really important thing to
solve
now daniel dennett of course as many of
us when we've read his book
interpret him to be saying that
consciousness is no
deep mystery um and so
he he he dampens down consciousness but
what rises up
for him is free will he's a
compatibilist and he says well this is a
a mystery
um it's it's compatible with the
deterministic laws of physics which is
my view as well um so it tends to be the
case and
geron lanier makes makes this point as
well that when people deny
one mysterious aspect of reality it
tends to crop up unbidden
somewhere else in their ontology you
know what they
think reality consists of in some way
and he uses the the example of
the nature of personhood that if you
dismiss the deep mystery that is
what it means to be a person what a
person is and the fact that a person is
in his words an infinite will of mystery
which is this this idea that tries to
capture the fact that we don't have an
answer to what a person is we can't
program computers to be people
he agrees with david deutsch there he
says that people who dismiss that as
being some sort of deep mystery
tend to find themselves caught up in
concerns or confusions about what the
present moment means
because the people who dismiss the deep
mystery of personhood
are often reductionists
in the physicalist sense they see a
block
universe you know as general relativity
might say yes that the
the past times and the future times as
well as the present time
uh or just instances of times there's
just times
off into the 13.7 billion years into the
past
and off into the uh extreme deep distant
future
but there's no privileged times
yesterday
is just as real as today as
tomorrow in a in this universe described
by a special relativity
this block universe all of the times
exist in some way
and none of them are privileged that's
the picture we get
it's just your perspective okay if
you're on the other side of the universe
then the time that you see is not
simultaneous with my time we get into
this deep
questions of physics right but a person
who believes
um that there's no mystery there then
has to try and explain
why it is that now here for you
things are special something is
different the
present moment is illuminated in a way
that yesterday is not
that you don't experience yesterday in
the same way that you'll experience
today right now
you only experience now now so there's
this weird mystery
that exists in the universe about why
the present moment is different
to other moments while you experience
the present moment is different to other
moments
this is what jared lenier says about
people who try to deny the deep mystery
of consciousness it tends to crop up in
this other way
and so too i would say with any of these
questions about
creativity or free will or choice um and
consciousness and i've made this point
before
about if you live in any city around the
world
and you look around then what you see
is less due to the action
of purely deterministic physical forces
you know in the case of sydney the
action of
geological weathering and erosion over
i time it out the sydney basin and i've
made this point before
but if you look at the city skyline of
sydney
and i'll come back to this shortly with
a specific example you look at the city
skyline of sydney
trying to use our natural
sciences in order to explain what's
going on there
the appearance what we see in this
picture of the sydney cbd
trying to use geology or plain
physics in order to explain any of this
is
going to be a fruitless exercise
you're going to miss the point if you
try and use
those natural sciences you need to use
the proper
explanation why does sydney look like
this well the reason sydney looks like
this and there's a number of buildings
there that are prominent but let's take
um
sydney tower there which is the tallest
building at least as of today in sydney
someone chose to build that thing and
someone
chose to design it that way someone
created the design
and then people came together and freely
decided
that they would put their efforts in to
constructing and raising this thing
up into the sky that's the explanation
the the geology and the physics kind of
by the by
they're the things that the people
choose to use
to to take advantage of their knowledge
of those things in order to
build structures like this so if we seek
to explain
and not merely describe in terms of
deterministic laws
then we must invoke creativity
and various other abstract realities
reality is indeed a
unified whole of course reality is a
unified whole but at the same time we
can divide it up
into different in different ways
space-time and matter and energy or
fundamental particles and emergent
objects like
cats and galaxies or the physical
and the abstract and these various ways
of dividing up
reality of dividing things up don't
privilege one aspect over and above the
other
it is as correct to say that the cat is
moving the atoms from a to b
as it is to say that the cat moves from
a to b
because the atom's making up its body do
but there is a real distinction between
and this is another way of dividing up
reality
explaining something in terms of things
that exist
and having an in principle description
of what the particles are doing and i've
made this point with
people recently and i i guess i am going
off on this tangent a little bit much
but let me just hop on again for a
moment about this
the explanation as to why
at the higher emergent level that
certain things occur is really
the explanation it is not the fact that
certain things were
determined to have happened because the
big bang happened
and the laws of motion acted upon
particles over time
and caused them to appear where they
appeared
today that is not an explanation that
isn't
in principle you would be able to
describe the motion of those particles
and where they end up today and so
this is why the fabric of reality
winston churchill
copper atom story is just so deeply
profound
and i think escapes sometimes
the escapes discussions on this topic
let's just recap that and you can you
can fast forward the next five or ten
minutes as i go through this
yet again but but let me try and refine
it
in a certain way the the situation is
this
there is a statue in parliament square
in london of winston churchill and the
tip of that statue
is a copper atom why is the copper atom
there now on the one hand
you can say that well the copper atom is
there for the same reason that
any atom is anywhere right now and any
atom is anywhere right now because
13.7 billion years in the past
approximately the big bang occurred
and all of mata and space and energy
exploded out from that point
and eventually some of it over millions
of years coalesced
into stars the first generation of stars
at the end of their lives some of them
exploded in supernova
supernovae explosions and scattered
their contents across
a wide region of space and some of those
atoms due to astrophysical processes
were copper atoms those copper atoms
then
coalesced mixing with the hydrogen
helium and the intergalactic space
and some of them formed new stars and
some of them formed planets as well
like the earth and so the earth formed
out of this previously exploded star or
stars
and contains copper and the copper atom
again under the forces of nature
under gravity and electromagnetism and
so on and so forth weathering and
erosion
ended up in a certain place where it was
quarried and
the forces of nature eventually cause it
to end up at the tip of
winston churchill's nose and that's why
that copper atom is there
due to deterministic physical laws
that's not an explanation that's a
general purpose statement about
any particular bit of matter anywhere in
the entire universe
and when people try to invoke this
to explain away something like free will
for example
and try to say it couldn't have been a
free choice because
you were determined to do what you were
determined to do
because of the big bang the laws of
physics that were there
are still acting right now and you have
to obey these deterministic laws
in the same way that the copper atom had
to obey a deterministic law to end up
where it did
it completely misses the point about
what an explanation truly is
free will is not an attempt to get
outside of the laws of physics
and it's an attempt to explain what is
really going on in the context of a
deterministic universe
in the context of a deterministic
universe
we have species arising that didn't
arise before
but no biologist should be tempted to
say
well there's no such thing as evolution
by natural selection evolution by
natural selection doesn't really create
new species all that's happening is
atoms are following deterministic laws
of physics
that would be ridiculous and i don't
think any physicist makes this point i
don't think any scientist no biologist
makes this point
what they say is the explanation of the
origin of species is
evolution by natural selection it's this
emergent
concept that these things called species
exist
this thing called selection exists and
that
niches are filled or niches as some
people say
buy organisms that are fittest in that
particular environment and if the
environment changes
the genes are selected against and the
species can sometimes go extinct
to be filled by new species with genes
that are fitter for that particular
environment
that's an explanation it's an emergent
explanation but all and all of those
things are real
they're really happening selection is
really happening adaptation is really
happening
nature's really exist and species really
exist and fill those niches
now in precisely the same way
all we have to say is that the reason
why
for example the copper atom is at the
tip of winston churchill's nose
the explanation of that is that there
was a war
called the second world war involving
two sides of great powers
dominant among them the united kingdom
and germany
the leaders of whom were adolf hitler
and winston churchill and winston
churchill
eventually won the war for his side
and so we like to out of respect
remember great heroes who've saved
civilization
one of whom was winston churchill
and as whom we learned recently kyle
popper thought was a great
epistemologist
i'll go back to a previous episode for
that one
winston churchill is his statue is there
with a copper atom
at its nose because we make statues out
of bronze so that they don't weather
away quite so quickly
but someone chose to build that statue
chose to design it in that way in fact
groups of people
came to that decision and freely chose
to do so
and trying to eliminate choice
and freedom out of that whole picture is
to break what would otherwise be
a good explanation because we try and
say it's merely
determined by physical laws
deterministic laws then
we've missed the entire point of trying
to explain what's going on in the real
world
this reductionist conception
of how it is that reality evolves over
time
is simply it's not false but it simply
misses the point
it's true vacuously
we can always say that anything that
happens was determined to happen
it doesn't get us very far
in denying the supernatural we don't
have to
embrace pure reductionist
physicalism we can take another avenue
where we say
yes of course physics is
fundamentally true it's correct as a
description of reality
but it doesn't explain everything that's
going on and besides
the strange thing is that for someone
who says they could
in principle in principle
predict what a person is going to do
next
or predict what is going to happen next
if they had
a full description of the laws of
physics and the initial conditions
is doing nothing in my opinion but
invoking the supernatural
because what is this thing that is able
to actually do that predicting
well an oracle with the full knowledge
of the laws of physics well this oracle
is basically
the omniscient theistic god
the god that knows everything that's
going to happen the god that created the
universe and knows everything that's
going to happen
so it is a an appeal to the supernatural
now someone might say oh no we don't
need that maybe we can just have a
supercomputer of the future
i doubt it um this supercomputer of the
future would have to calculate
all of the different alternatives that
could possibly happen in
countless numbers of universes and it
would have to know
with perfect precision what the initial
conditions are
at any particular given time so that it
can make this deterministic prediction
but we know from physics you cannot have
a perfect
understanding of the conditions at any
particular time for all the atoms in the
universe
we're going to have a perfect
understanding of where exactly
they are we know that's not possible
given the heisenberg uncertainty a
principle among other things
but we know that we can't have this
complete knowledge
simultaneously of every single atom in
the entire universe relativity for
another reason
so this idea that we could in principle
in principle have this predictive
mechanism that would allow us to
determine exactly what's going to happen
next
is itself an appeal to the supernatural
the device required in order to do this
would be magical it would have to have
all the qualities that an omniscient
creator of the universe would have and
so this is why i reject this idea that
in principle the idea that
we could with full knowledge of the laws
of physics and
full knowledge of the initial conditions
predict what's going to happen next
therefore you don't have free will
i think is false because i don't think
such an
in-principle argument has
any bearing on the reality of free will
when
in practice it will never be possible it
will never be possible because
no such device can do such a measurement
of all the particles in the entire
universe it would have to be
a god of some sort okay that takes me
far away from anything to do with this
chapter again